---
title: "Background"
date: 2021-03-01T12:00:00-05:00
description: "Project Goals"
---
1. [Tasks](#tasks)
    1. [Loon Observations and Gravity Wave Momentum Flux Estimates](#task1)
    2. [High-resolution Model Simulations of Gravity Waves](#task2)
    3. [Ray Tracing-based Parameterization of Gravity Waves](#task3)
    4. [Machine Learning-based Parameterization of Gravity Waves](#task4)
    5. [Task 5: Gravity  Wave  Impacts  in  Climate  Projections](#task5)
2. [Publications](#publications)


# Task Groups {#tasks}
## Task 1:  Loon Observations and Gravity Wave Momentum Flux Estimates {#task1}
Our first objective is to open up the Loon observation dataset to the research community, and use it to provide estimated of GW statistics in the lower stratosphere.  Variables to be made available include temperature, pressure, and horizontal winds.  Processed data will include  estimates  of  vertical  velocity  and  the  momentum  flux. Signals identified between the buoyancy and Coriolis periods can unambiguously be  identified  as  GWs,  which  permits  application  of  the  GW  dispersion  and  polarization relations *(Fritts and Alexander(2003)* and *Gossard and Hooke(1975)*).

GW momentum fluxes will be determined as a function of wave intrinsic frequency using wavelet  analysis  tools  *(Vincent  and  Hertzog,  2014)*.

## Task 2:  High-resolution Model Simulations of Gravity Waves {#task2}
While Loon observations can provide comprehensive estimates of GW momentum fluxes in the lower stratosphere, they cannot provide a complete view of GW momentum deposition.To infer the drag,  we will couple these observations with carefully validated model integrations *(Alexander and Sato, 2015)*.  We propose gravity-wave resolving simulations with the Weather and Research Forecast model (WRF) that are suitable for direct validation with Loon observations.

### Orographic  gravity  waves:
GWs  generated  by  flow  over  orography  (OGW)  are  the most straightforward type of GW for a hybrid model-observation approach.  Despite greater confidence in the source of OGWs, there remains a great deal of uncertainty in OGW drag; local weather conditions alter the vertical and horizontal propagation and breaking levels. We  will  validate  high-resolution  simulations  initialized  with  matched  weather  conditions taken from weather and climate analyses with Loon observations *(Alexander et al., 2019)*.

### Non-orographic gravity waves:
GWs generated by convection (CGW) present a more challenging  problem  because  the  sources  themselves  are  much  more  difficult  to  model:Even  very  high-resolution  weather  forecasting  models  with  state-of-the-art  initialization will  more  often  than  not  fail  to  predict  the  correct  timing  and  locations  of  individual intense rain cells that act as the strongest sources of CGW. Thus, we will employ a specialized data-driven approach developed by *Stephan and Alexander(2015)* in order to compare simulations of CGW with Loon observations. We  will  also  examine  the  approach  described  in *(de la Camara and Lott, 2015)*, using potential vorticity as the identifying source parameter for GW generation near fronts. This method has potential to include both dry dynamics and moisture effects on CGW through heating effects on potential vorticity generation.

## Task 3: Ray Tracing-based Parameterization of Gravity Waves {#task3}
We  will  develop  ray-tracing  GWP  strategies,  both  as  a  potential  alternative  to  currentGWP, and as a source of data for ML schemes.  This work will build on the generalized GW model MS-GWaM (Multi-Scale GW Model) and its implementation into the German NWP and climate community code ICON *(Borchert  et  al., 2019)*,  as described by *Boloni et al (in prep.)*  and Kim et al (in prep.)  by the research group in Frankfurt.

### ICON/MS-GWaM as a data source and reference for ML parameterizations:
ICON/MS-GWaM will be integrated at varying resolution, 80, 40, and 20 km (for a limited integration), to enable validation against Loon data, and to provide global data.

### Integration  of  OGWs  into  MS-GWaM:
OGW  emission  by  time-varying  flows  is highly  transient.   Hence  it  is  important  to  also  replace  the  steady-state  and  1D  scheme from *Lott and Miller(1997)* for OGW drag by a corresponding source in MS-GWaM. This will first be tested it in our idealized local-area flow solver.  Corresponding lessons will then be used in an implementation into ICON/MS-GWaM.

### Efficiency improvement of MS-GWaM:
Following *de la Camara and Lott(2015)*, we could coarse-grain MS-GWaM by randomly picking a subset of ray volumes.  This stochastic approach  will  be  enhanced  by  each  ray  volume  representing  an  ensemble  of  smaller  ray volumes.  Experience from work on semi-empirical subgrid-scale parameterizations *(Pierothet al., 2018;Zacharuk et al., 2018)* will be used to represent the effect of the ensemble spread on the effective development of the representative ray volume, in close interaction with the ML experts in the project.  The ensemble parameterization will be trained on output from the unsimplified MS-GWaM, and calibrated against available climatologies and Loon data.

## Task 4: Machine Learning-based Parameterization of Gravity Waves {#task4}
We  propose  applying  a  hierarchy  of  ML  methods  to  emulate/estimate GWP schemes:  random forests,  deep  artificial  neural  networks  (ANNs),  and  convolutional  neural  networks.   In assessing the performance of each ML method, our eventual metric is not only the offline accuracy  of  a  trained  data-driven  scheme,  but  also  the  accuracy  and  stability  when  the data-driven scheme is implemented in a GCM and is used online in Task 5.

### Emulating  single-column  parameterizations:
The  first  step  is  to  emulate  existing single-column (1D) GWPs with a data-driven approach.  This will provide a faster parameterization with  the  same  accuracy to accelerate climate model integrations.  Our goal is to use this as a stepping stone toward new schemes constrained by observations and high-resolution model integrations of real GWs.

### Developing  a  data-driven,  single-column  parameterization:
As  Loon-based  estimates of GW momentum fluxes become available through Tasks 1 and 2 we will use samples to develop 1-D data-driven parameterization to reproduce the GW momentum flux in the lower stratosphere.  We start with 1D data-driven scheme for two reasons:  First,  development of a 1D ML-based data-driven scheme constrained data can guide and facilitate the development of a 3D scheme.  Second, in the current weather and climate models, all physics-based parameterization schemes, including those for GWs, are single column to allow efficient parallelization.

### Exploring efficient 3D data-driven parameterizations:
We will develop a 3-D data-driven representation using samples from the outputs of Tasks 2 and 3. Potential challenges in achieving this goal are that the 3-D representation is likely a complex function (at least compared with 1-D), while each 6-hourly 3D field providing a more limited number of samples, depending on the allowed spatial range of interactions.  While explicitly requiring inter-column communication by a GWP would break the parallelization of climate physics packages, models can pass advected variables.  We can therefore create new  variable(s)  to  capture  information  on  GW  spectral  properties  (i.e.,  the  mean  and spectral width) that are advected and diffused by the resolved flow.

## Task 5: Gravity  Wave  Impacts  in  Climate  Projections {#task5}
The final task is to implement the 1D and 3D data-driven GWPs in GCMs.  Our objectives here are twofold:  i) to assess the accuracy/stability of the data-driven GWPs when coupled to a GCM, and ii) to study phenomena such as the tropospheric jet, QBO, and polar vortex using the new ML-enabled GCMs.  One challenge in this area is efficiently implementing3D GWPs in GCMs, whose numerical architectures are designed for 1D schemes.

### Single-column model tests:
The 1D GWPs will first be tested in a single-column atmospheric  model,  where  advective  tendencies  are  provided  as  an  external  forcing  to  the column.  Combining the PIs’ expertise in modeling and ML, we will develop strategies for accurate *and* stable integration of ML-based GWP schemes.

### Full 3D model tests and the calibration problem:
The unresolved GW momentum flux  depends  critically  on  model  resolution  and  numerical  accuracy;  one  must  carefully match a GWP to the fraction of the spectrum resolved by the model itself.  As existing GWP  are  often  “tuned”  to  generate  a  realistic  QBO,  this  would  be  a  good  first  point of  contact  with  existing  GWP  development.

A  second  focus  will  be  on  the  role  of  GWP  on  the  climatology  and  variability  of  the polar stratospheric vortex.  GCMs often suffer from a well known “cold pole bias”, where the  polar  stratosphere  is  too  cold.   When  coupled  with  ozone  chemistry,  this  accelerates stratospheric ozone loss; without tuning, models can produce an ozone hole in the NorthernHemisphere. The role of GWP in extreme variability of the stratospheric vortex will also be explored.

Finally, we will consider the response of the tropospheric jets, vortex, and QB Oto  idealized  climate  change  scenario  experiments,  particularly  the  instantaneous  4xCO2integrations in the CMIP6 DECK profiles.  The DynVarMIP *(Gerber and Manzini, 2016)* provides diagnostics of GW momentum deposition, allowing for an explicit comparison with CMIP6 models.

# Publications {#publications}
